docs: fill out react native and ios docs topics (#104)
spokestack/spokestack-website: content/docs/React Native/tts.md

---
title: Text-to-speech for React Native
navId: TTS (react-native)
description: Documentation for Spokestack's React Native TTS API.
draft: false
---

Text-to-speech is a broad topic, but as far as Spokestack is concerned, there are two things your app has to handle: sending the input to be synthesized, and playing the resulting audio for your users. This guide will cover both.

## Starting up

To synthesize speech in Spokestack, use the `synthesize` method. This small API is built similarly to the speech pipeline, but it operates independently.

Here's how to initialize the TTS API as part of the unified Spokestack initialization:

```javascript
Spokestack.initialize({
  // omitting speech pipelineline and nlu configuration
  input: '',
  stages: [],
  properties: {},
  nlu: {},
  tts: {
    ttsServiceClass: 'io.spokestack.spokestack.tts.SpokestackTTSService',
    // Spokestack account information

>     'spokestack-id': 'f0bc990c-e9db-4a0c-a2b1-6a6395a3d97e', // your Spokestack API ID

Reviewer: Worth considering reading these from `properties` instead since they're applicable to 2/3 of the pipeline stages, and possibly to NLU as well if we release a cloud version.

Author: yes, that will be outside the scope of this doc though

Reviewer: Totally. I just note these things as I see them so I don't forget to note them.

    'spokestack-secret':
      '5BD5483F573D691A15CFA493C1782F451D4BD666E39A9E7B2EBE287E6A72C6B6' // your Spokestack API secret
  }
})
```

In this example, `spokestack-id` and `spokestack-secret` are set to public values that let you try Spokestack TTS without creating an account. [Create an account](/create) or [sign in](/login) to get your own free API credentials and access to additional features!

## Generating the audio

> Generating a URL to a audio stream of a tts synthesized voice is just a single method in Spokestack!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Generating a URL to an audio stream of a TTS synthesized voice is just a single method in Spokestack!
```

```javascript
Spokestack.synthesize({
  input: 'Here I am, a brain the size of a planet.',
  format: Spokestack.TTSFormat.TEXT,
  voice: 'demo-male'
})
```

> We'll break down what was included in the `synthesize` arguments here, and there's also more details on the [API documentation](https://github.com/spokestack/react-native-spokestack#methods):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We'll break down what was included in the `synthesize` arguments here; there's even more detail in the [API documentation](https://github.com/spokestack/react-native-spokestack#methods):
```

The `input` is simply the string you want to hear synthesized.

The `format` argument is here because Spokestack supports serveral input formats: plain text, [SpeechMarkdown](https://www.speechmarkdown.org/), and a subset of the [SSML](https://www.w3.org/TR/speech-synthesis11) spec for specifying pronunciation and specific pause times. See [the TTS concept guide](/docs/Concepts/tts) for more information on providing SSML input. If you don't need this level of control, simply specify `Spokestack.TTSFormat.TEXT` like in the above example.

> The `voice` argument allows you to specify which of Spokestack's library of synthetic voices you wish to use. Want something besides `demo-male`? [Create a Spokestack account](/create) to get your own free access to additional voices!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `voice` argument allows you to specify which of Spokestack's library of synthetic voices you wish to use. Want something besides `demo-male`? [Create a Spokestack account](/create) to get your own free access to additional voices!
```
Which free additional voices?
